.\"
.\" budgie-session manual page.
.\" (C) 2000 Miguel de Icaza (miguel@helixcode.com)
.\" (C) 2009-2010 Vincent Untz (vuntz@gnome.org)
.\" (C) 2019 Benjamin Berg (bberg@redhat.com)
.\" (C) 2020 Sebastian Geiger (sbastig@gmx.net)
.\" (C) 2023 BuddiesOfBudgie
.\"
.TH budgie-session 1 "Oct 2023" "BUDGIE"
.SH NAME
budgie-session \- Start the budgie desktop environment
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B budgie-session [\-a|\-\-autostart=DIR] [\-\-session=SESSION] [\-\-failsafe|\-f] [\-\-debug] [\-\-whale]
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fIbudgie-session\fP program starts up the budgie desktop
environment. This command is typically executed by your login manager
(either gdm, xdm, or from your X startup scripts). It will load
either your saved session, or the default budgie
installation on your system. Note that \fIbudgie-session\fP is a wrapper
script for \fIbudgie-session-binary\fP.
.PP
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/budgie-session/sessions\fP,
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/budgie-session/sessions\fP and
\fB$XDG_DATA_DIRS/budgie-session/sessions\fP.
.PP
When saving a session, \fIbudgie-session\fP saves the currently running
applications in the \fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/budgie-session/saved-session\fP
directory. Saving sessions is only supported with the legacy non-systemd
startup method.
.PP
\fIbudgie-session\fP is an X11R6 session manager. It can manage budgie
applications as well as any X11R6 SM compliant application.
.SH OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.TP
.I "--autostart=DIR"
The directory \fBDIR\fP to be searched for autostart .desktop files. This option can be used multiple times.
When this option is present, then default autostart directories will not be searched.
.TP
.I "--session=SESSION"
Use the applications defined in \fBSESSION.session\fP. If not specified,
\fBbudgie.session\fP will be used.
.TP
.I "--builtin"
Use the legacy non-systemd method of managing the user session. 
.TP
.I "--failsafe"
Run in fail-safe mode. User-specified applications will not be started.
.TP
.I "--debug"
Enable debugging code.
.TP
.I "--whale"
Show the fail whale in a dialog for debugging it.
.SH SESSION DEFINITION
Sessions are defined in \fB.session\fP files, that are using a .desktop-like
format, with the following keys in the \fBbudgie Session\fP group:
.TP
.I Name
Name of the session. This can be localized.
.TP
.I RequiredComponents
List of component identifiers (desktop files) that are required by the session. The required components will always run in the session.
.PP
Here is an example of a session definition:
.PP
.in +4n
.nf
[budgie Session]
Name=budgie
RequiredComponents=budgie-desktop;gnome-settings-daemon;
.in
.fi
.PP
The \fB.session\fP files are looked for in
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/budgie-session/sessions\fP,
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/budgie-session/sessions\fP and
\fB$XDG_DATA_DIRS/budgie-session/sessions\fP.
.PP
It is best to use
\fI--builtin\fP if session customizations are required. This is due to the way
that budgie currently defines the components that will be started on each session
type.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
\fIbudgie-session\fP sets several environment variables for the use of
its child processes:
.PP
.B SESSION_MANAGER
.IP
This variable is used by session-manager aware clients to contact
budgie-session.
.PP
.B DISPLAY
.IP
This variable is set to the X display being used by
\fIbudgie-session\fP. Note that if the \fI--display\fP option is used
this might be different from the setting of the environment variable
when budgie-session is invoked.
.PP
Behavior of \fIbudgie-session\fP ifself can be modified via the following environment variable:
.PP
.B GNOME_SESSION_AUTOSTART_DIR
.IP
This variable specifies a list of directories to the searched for autostart
files. This variable overrides all directories specified via the
\fI--autostart\fP option, as well as all default autostart directories.
.SH FILES
.PP
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/autostart
.B $XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/autostart
.B /usr/share/gnome/autostart
.IP
Applications defined via .desktop files in those directories will be started on login.
.PP
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/budgie-session/sessions
.B $XDG_CONFIG_DIRS/budgie-session/sessions
.B $XDG_DATA_DIRS/budgie-session/sessions
.IP
These directories contain the \fB.session\fP files that can be used
with the \fI--session\fP option.
.PP
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/budgie-session/saved-session
.IP
This directory contains the list of applications of the saved session.
.SH BUGS
If you find bugs in the \fIbudgie-session\fP program, please report
these on https://github.com/buddiesofbudgie/budgie-session/issues.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR budgie-session-quit(1)
